doc/builders/trivial-builders: improvements (#249721)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/builders/trivial-builders.chapter.md

# Trivial Builders {#chap-trivial-builders}

Nixpkgs provides a variety of functions that help with building derivations.

> The most important of these, `stdenv.mkDerivation`, has already been documented above.
> The following functions wrap `stdenv.mkDerivation`, making it easier to use in certain cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following functions wrap [`stdenv.mkDerivation`](link), making it easier to use in certain cases.
```

## `runCommand` {#trivial-builder-runCommand}

This takes three arguments, `name`, `env`, and `buildCommand`:

* `name` is just the name that Nix will append to the store path in the same way that `stdenv.mkDerivation` uses its
  `name` attribute.

> * `env` is an attribute set, specifying environment variables that will be available in the build script for this derivation.

Reviewer: Not just environment variables, `env` is passed directly to `stdenv.mkDerivation`, should be called `args`/`attrs` instead, especially to avoid confusion with `mkDerivation`'s `env` attribute.

>   These attributes are passed through in the underlying call to `stdenv.mkDerivation`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  These attributes are passed through to the underlying `stdenv.mkDerivation` call.
```

* `buildCommand` is a `bash` script that will be run to build this derivation.

>   Note that you will need to create `$out` as part of the build script for Nix to consider the command as having executed successfully.

Reviewer: Point out `$out` will be an environment variable available in the build script pointing to the resulting nix store path.

Maybe link to `stdenv.mkDerivation` multiple outputs, default output is `out`, etc.

## `runCommandCC` {#trivial-builder-runCommandCC}

This works just like `runCommand`. The only difference is that it also provides a C compiler in `buildCommand`'s environment.
To minimize your dependencies, you should only use this if you are sure you will need a C compiler to run your command.

## `runCommandLocal` {#trivial-builder-runCommandLocal}

> A variant of `runCommand` that ensures the derivation is built locally instead of substituting a remote build.

Reviewer: Can link to `runCommand` here

It can save time and speed up a larger collection of builds by avoiding the network round-trip to check if a remote substitution is available.
However, it is only intended for very cheap commands (<1s execution time).

::: {.note}

> This sets `allowSubstitutes` to `false`.

Reviewer: Could link to Nix manual

Only use `runCommandLocal` if you are certain the user will always have a builder for the `system` of the derivation.
This should be true for most trivial use cases (e.g., just copying some files to a different location or adding symlinks)

> because there the `system` is usually the same as `builtins.currentSystem`.

Reviewer: Let's link to https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/conf-file.html?highlight=nix.conf#conf-system instead, documents what this is

:::

## `writeTextFile` {#trivial-builder-writeTextFile}

There are a range of functions that let you write text files into the Nix store, starting with `writeTextFile`.

> It accepts one argument as an attribute set containing the following names:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It accepts one argument as an attribute set containing the following attributes:
```

* `name` is the name that Nix will append to the store path in the same way that `stdenv.mkDerivation` uses its `name` attribute.
* `text` is the contents of the file to be written.

> * `executable` is an optional boolean flag indicating if the output file should be executable. It is `false` by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `executable` is an optional boolean flag indicating whether the output file should be executable. It is `false` by default.
```

> * `destination` is an optional relative path to be appended to the store path when adding the file to the Nix store.

Reviewer: Default should be mentioned

> * `checkPhase` is an optional script that can be run to verify the output file. It is empty by default and is typically used to perform syntax checks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `checkPhase` is an optional script that can be run to validate the output file. It is empty by default and is typically used to perform syntax checks.
```

> * `allowSubstitutes` is an optional boolean flag indicating if the derivation can be substituted for a remote build.

Reviewer: Not entirely right, a remote build is not a substitution. Let's link to https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/language/advanced-attributes.html?highlight=allowSubstitut#adv-attr-allowSubstitutes instead. Also https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/glossary#gloss-substitute

  It is `false` by default.

> * `preferLocalBuild` is an optional boolean flag indicating a preference for the derivation to be built locally instead of with a remote builder.

Reviewer: https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/language/advanced-attributes.html?highlight=allowSubstitut#adv-attr-preferLocalBuild

  It is `true` by default.

> * `meta` is an attribute set which is passed through and corresponds to the `meta` argument for `stdenv.mkDerivation`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `meta` is an attribute set which is passed through to the `meta` attribute for `stdenv.mkDerivation`, while adding `meta.mainProgram` if appropriate
```

Also link to `mainProgram` reference

  executable = true;
  destination = "/bin/my-file";
}
```

> Building on `writeTextFile`there are a series of simplifications which tailor it to a particular use case and are listed below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building on `writeTextFile`, there is a number of convenience functions which tailor it to a particular use case and are listed below.
```

Here are some examples:

```nix
# Writes my-file to /nix/store/<store path>

concatTextFile {
  name = "my-file";
  files = [ drv1 "${drv2}/path/to/file" ];
}

# Writes executable my-file to /nix/store/<store path>/bin/my-file

concatTextFile {
  name = "my-file";
  files = [ drv1 "${drv2}/path/to/file" ];
  executable = true;
  destination = "/bin/my-file";
}
```

Building on `concatTextFile` there are a series of simplifications which tailor it to a particular use case and are listed below.

### `concatText` {#trivial-builder-concatText}

```nix
# Writes contents of files to /nix/store/<store path>

concatText "my-file" [ file1 file2 ]
```

### `concatScript` {#trivial-builder-concatScript}

```nix
# Writes contents of files to /nix/store/<store path> and makes it executable

concatScript "my-file" [ file1 file2 ]
```

## `writeShellApplication` {#trivial-builder-writeShellApplication}

This function accepts one argument as an attribute set containing the following names:

* `name` is the name that Nix will append to the store path in the same way that `stdenv.mkDerivation` uses its `name` attribute.
* `text` is the contents of the script.

> * `runtimeInputs` is a list of derivations.
>   For each runtime input `/nix/store/<store path>/bin` will be added to the `PATH` of the script before executing the contents of `text`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `runtimeInputs` is a list of derivations.
  For each runtime input `getBin` of it will be prepended to the `PATH` at the start of the script.
```

* `checkPhase` is an optional script that can be run to verify the output file.
  It is empty by default and is typically used to perform syntax checks.

In addition to setting the `PATH` based on `runtimeInputs`, `writeShellApplication` also sets some sane shellopts (`errexit`, `nounset`, `pipefail`)

> and checks the resulting script with `shellcheck`.

Reviewer: Looks like the default `checkPhase` is shellcheck, so it's not run when changed.

For example:

```nix
writeShellApplication {
  name = "show-nixos-org";
  runtimeInputs = [ curl w3m ];
  text = ''

    # instead of ${curl}/bin/curl we can call it directly as it available in the PATH
    # we can do the same with w3m

    curl -s 'https://nixos.org' | w3m -dump -T text/html
  '';
}
```

## `symlinkJoin` {#trivial-builder-symlinkJoin}

This function can be used to merge the directory structure of several derivations into one.

> It works by creating a new derivation and adding symbolic links to each of the paths provided.

Reviewer: Needs a bit of work, it's specifically files of the paths, but cutting off early when there's only one path for a directory.

It accepts one argument as an attribute set containing the following names:

* `name` is the name that Nix will append to the store path in the same way that `stdenv.mkDerivation` uses its `name` attribute.
* `paths` is a list of paths to merge.

>   They can be paths to Nix store derivations or any other subdirectory contained within.

Reviewer: All values that can be coerced to strings (`isString...`) pointing to paths. Maybe https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#function-library-lib.strings.isStringLike, needs a bit of work.

* `preferLocalBuild` is an optional boolean flag indicating a preference for the derivation to be built locally instead of with a remote builder.
  It is `true` by default.
* `allowSubstitutes` is an optional boolean flag indicating if the derivation can be substituted for a remote build.
  It is `false` by default.

> * `postBuild` is an optional script which can be run at the end of building the combined derivation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `postBuild` is an optional script which is run at the end of building the combined derivation.
```

## `writeReferencesToFile` {#trivial-builder-writeReferencesToFile}

> Writes the closure of transitive dependencies for a given derivation to a file.

Reviewer: transitive dependencies of a derivation output

/nix/store/<hash>-glibc-2.32-40
```

You can see that this includes the derivation `hi` (from the call to `writeScriptBin`),  `hello` which is a direct reference,
and the other paths that are indirectly required to run `hello`.

## `writeDirectReferencesToFile` {#trivial-builder-writeDirectReferencesToFile}

> Writes the set of immediate references for a given derivation to a file.

Reviewer: Direct dependencies of a derivation output.
